The lead author, Daniel Yergin, came to public acclaim with his 1991 Pulitzer Prize winning work, "The Prize" that offered insights into the world oil industry and its relationships with world politics. This book, published later that decade in 1998, studies the relationship between the private and public sector in key countries over the course of the 20th century, with emphasis on the USA, UK, Russia/USSR, China, and India. In each one, the authors focus on the growth of government intervention after either a major war (WWII for USA/UK) or after a major political revolution, as in the case of India after political independence. In each case, the authors argue that the modern state has reached the upper limits of promoting economic development in each of these countries, and instead the private sector is where economic growth must come from. For example, the authors blame India's lackluster growth on its government bureaucracy's stifling entrepreneurship. The drains from the political and military rivalry with Pakistan is neglected, even though it is well understood that many corrupt politicians and political parties can stay in power as long as they can point to a foreign enemy. I would argue this same argument applies to the US, where too much resources went into prosecuting the Cold War than into local economic development. Think of the hundreds of thousands of young Americans hurt or scarred by the Vietnam War. The political divisions it created in every community would often impede economic development. Another mistake the authors make is in neglecting the role of financial speculation, whether it be in land or stocks or other financial instruments. Whether it the Savings and Loan scandals of that unfolded throughout the 1980's, or the real estate bubble of the 1990s, with each financial panic, people and governments responded by introducing programs that protected and regulated the speculation, instead of doing the right thing of taxing speculative profits to the point of making speculation unprofitable.