The White Tiger by Aravind Adiga is a humorous, satirical, yet angry, story of life in India. The plot is based on Balram Halwai, a self described “entrepreneur” writing a letter to Chinese premier Wen Jiabao who is planning a state visit to India. Balram is a White Tiger because he is rare like this animal. He is wanted by the police apparently for stealing a bag of money. Balram fills in the details in his letter to Wen, starting from his early years in the city of Laxmangarh (near New Delhi) where he lived with his family. His father was a rickshaw puller. After the father dies Balram goes to Dhanbad with his brother, Kishan, and they work in a teashop. But he is dissatisfied with this lowly occupation and learns how to drive a car and gets a job as chauffeur to Mr. Ashok and his family. Ashok is a modern Indian who has lived in the United States and has somewhat different views from traditional Indians. Balram maneuvers his way from #2 driver to #1 and goes on a trip to New Delhi with Ashok and his wife, Pinky Madam. They take up residence in the suburb of Gurgaon and Ashok and his family engage in a process of bribing government officials to facilitate their business interests. Pinky Madam gets bored with this life and leaves Ashok and he takes to drink and other women. Balram increasing becomes unhappy with his position and decides to kill Ashok and steal a large sum of money. The story continues to its conclusion with Balram now a successful businessman in Bangalore. He justifies his actions by saying that the poor in India are like chickens in a coop waiting to be killed. He decides to break out of this situation by his actions and becomes that rare breed, a white tiger.

I lived in New Delhi for a year in 2004 and can vouch for the veracity of the details that Adiga provides about the city and India. The extremes of poverty and wealth, the corruption of government officials, the shabby treatment paid to servants and the fake politeness are all typical of modern India. The time frame of the book is not clear except that the references to Wen Jiabao, Sonia Ghandi and the “Great Socialist” place it in the early part of the 21st century. This last reference may refer to the head of the Bharatiya Janata Party which gained power for a short time from 1998 to 2004 over the traditional ruling party of the Indian National Congress and the Gandhi family. However the BJP is highly nationalistic and conservative and not supportive of socialist ideas, so that this reference may just be made up by Adiga. In any case it is reasonable to assume that Adiga is referring to present day India. I recommend this book both for its interesting story line and humor and for the insights it provides into the contradictions in this complex country and the behavior of its people.