I have read Jonathan Spence's history course on modern China is one of the most popular courses at Yale University. "The Search for Modern China" is a great introduction to modern Chinese history. Spence's prose is very readable and the book is obviously exceedingly well researched. Unlike the tendency of most Americans to falsely claim the United States and the West in general are at the center of the historical unverse, this book presents modern Chinese history primarily in a Chinese context. I especially enjoyed the chapters about the fall of the Ming dynasty and the Kangxi emperor, who was probably the wisest and most capable of the Qing emperors. Americans and other people should be better able to understand after reading Jonathan Spence's book, the resentment many Chinese still have about recent, as well as current Western interference and continued popular hostility toward Japan. For nearly a century, as Spence ably writes, China endured a system of western imposed unequal treaties, a semi-colonial western and Japanese presence in many large Chinese cities and Japanese invasion. The western intrusion in China had the inadvertent consequences of weakening the Qing dynasty. The Japanese invasion prevented Jiang Jieshi or Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist armies from completely defeating Mao's Communist forces. Had there been no Japanese invasion of China, it is likely the communists would have never prevailed over the Nationalists. The century of western and Japanese imperialism in China helps explain why many Chinese still harbor strong suspicions and resentment about recent and current United States policies toward China. While the book is fairly long, I think Spence could improve his book even more if he made it longer, with more extensive coverage of Chinese history since 1960. My only specific criticism of this book is that Spence should have more thoroughly covered the immense human disaster of the so-called Great Leap Forward, where 20 to 30 million human beings, primarily peasants died of starvation because of the extremely misguided economic policies of Mao. Also, the Cultural Revolution was far more terrible than portrayed in this book. I highly recommend Jung Chang's "Wild Swans" for an excellent first hand description of the cruelty common by Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution. In general though, Jonathan Spence's book is an excellent introduction to modern Chinese history and can be reread for further understanding.