What an annoying book! I tried to read this book several years ago when it was all the rage in management circles, and they made you read it in college. I didn't get a thing out of it then, but I was much younger & thought I had missed something. Nope! There is nothing redeeming about this book. It is filled with personal stories, lots of religious references, and his own brand of "secret language" that imparts absolutely no meaning at all. Most of the time I never got the point he was trying to make.

Then there is his definition of being proactive. It really means just planning ahead. He says it means "we are responsible for our own lives. It means recognizing our responsibility to make things happen". Tell that to the guy in Africa whose choices are limited by the physical environment and the actions of others i.e. government to keep them in place. Covey tries to support this view by pulling out principals put forth by Viktor Frankl in his holocaust survival stories. Mr. Frankl used a technique designed to help him survive mentally in a place where all norms are turned upside down, and all you can do is have some control of your thoughts since all physical circumstances are totally controlled by someone else. Those kept in prison camps during times of war, prisoners kept in solitary confinement, etc. do the same thing because they have noticed if people give up mentally they tend to roll over and die. So, what does this survival technique have to do with his view of "being proactive" i.e. totally responsible for everything that happens in your life? I don't get that connection!

Covey also frequently talks about not using people, then tells you to "build emotional bank accounts" with others so you can leverage that in the future. Wow! And, this idea of "win-win" is not based in reality either. In human and animal societies there are winners and losers. Not every brilliant inventor will have all of the lucky and random circumstances to make him wildly successful. What Covey is talking about really is negotiating with someone so that each of you gets part of what they want with neither party getting everything. This is something humans do every day, and it takes no special jargon to comprehend this most basic of human (and animal) behavior.

I don't understand how anyone would find this book useful. Don't waste your time on this one.
