If there is any piece of literature that accurately reflects the best in humankind it is this one, and this is done using only one character. It might perhaps be difficult at first to accept that the incredible achievements of the human species could be exemplified in only person, but the author succeeds in doing so in this book, giving the reader a character that is both likeable and very human. Howard Roark stands in clear contrast to the other three in the book, who represent the temporary flaws in human conduct. The character and actions of these other three reflect what is most rare in human experience. Their outlooks and goals are shown in the story to lead to physical or emotional disintegration, a consequence of their sustained efforts to follow paths that deviate from those that are most resonant with the human psyche. The author's message is clear: sustained behavior such as that practiced by these individuals leads to severe dysfunction.
The sly manipulations of Ellsworth Toohey lead to his disgrace; the parasitism of Peter Keating results in his mental breakdown; and the power cravings of Gail Wynand make him powerless. Toohey fails because he overestimates his abilities to charm and mesmerize, and underestimates the power of a mind that cannot be bought, that cannot be corrupted, that is creatively rich and dogmatically rational. Keating fails because he cannot comprehend, and has no understanding, of what it truly takes to achieve greatness. Seduced by fame and recognition, his mind polluted by the pettiness of social climbing and the hitchhiking of another's ideas, he cannot sustain, tragically, any measure of human dignity and self-esteem. Wynand fails because he is seduced by the quantity of his readers and is ultimately fooled by their independence. He gives in to the crippling monster of cynicism, wiping out forever any chance at obtaining the real power of personal integrity and focused intelligence.
Roark succeeds because of his deep awareness and understanding of the essential needs of human experience. Creative accomplishment, originality of ideas and goals, and sustained concentration are the proper tools of the human mind, and like food and water, these cannot be ignored. Roark has penetrating insight into what it means to be really human. He is comfortable with himself and with others who believe the same. He knows that conflict will arise when interacting with those that don't, but he knows that such conflicts are temporary. A mediocre mind cannot compete with a competent one. Deception cannot compete with truth.
Roark stands on his building at the end of the story, and this ending is appropriate. He symbolizes the many in human history who have stood on the buildings of art, literature, science, philosophy, technology, and music. The names of these individuals don't always get put in the history books, but the impact of their genius is overwhelming. Although they may be unknown, they are not rare, and it is these individuals who move the world.
