There isn't much I can add to the comments already posted about "The Fountainhead", but I would like to chime in anyway.
This book started me on a quest for knowledge. I was completely enthralled with Ayn Rand's outlook on life and I dived headfirst into her other writings as a result, fiction and non-fiction alike.
Those interested in Objectivism should view "The Fountainhead" as a starting point, rather than an end product. The novel is complete in and of itself of course, yet I must disagree with some reviewers who state that the characters are unrealistic. In a generic sense, those reviewers are correct; Rand's characters do not speak and act much like they would in "real life" in the pages of "The Fountainhead". What some readers may not understand is that this was done intentionally! Rand took broad abstractions and made them flesh; this was her intent and she succeeds. Roark as the "perfect" man was intended to show man at his best, while Toohey and Keating reflect man at their worst; never was the intent to show man at his most "realistic". "The Fountainhead" is Romanticism at it's finest.
The story centers on Howard Roark, the Ideal Man. He is the flesh-and-blood manifestation of Rand's philosophy, Objectivism. Roark is an architect and the story follows his life and that of the people around him as he lives the life of the "perfect man". The novel raises questions about collectivism, altruism, selfishness, the nature of love and friendship, and individual rights among other things, but Rand takes things one step further; she is bold enough to provide ANSWERS. Perhaps it is her boldness that turns people off, but I find it very refreshing and unique.
Ayn Rand's writing style is the most powerful I have ever read. She can be introspective, brutal, thoughtful, reasoned, concise, and vicious all at the same time. Miss Rand is the most brilliant writer I have ever had the pleasure of reading.
After studying Rand's work for several years, I find myself in agreement with about 90% of her theories. I still don't understand her concepts of sexual love as presented in this book, however. I would disagree with those who call it "rape" but at the same time I fail to understand why Rand's views on sex demand such a "violent" overtone. After reading this book again recently, I'll have to go to my bookshelf and find other Rand essays on love/sex and see if I can make sense of it.
This book comes highly recommended, especially for those who enjoy a challenge in their reading. The philosophical questions herein force you to think about life and the world we live in.
