It’s such a positive book I thoroughly recommend it. The characterizations are brilliant, no muddled mixed grey areas; Rand unashamedly creates extremes to illustrate the book. It made me want to go to America in the 1920's and be an architect! The fresh, forward looking joy of life is genuinely uplifting.
The lead character, Howard Roark, with his abrupt, polite conversation with the various people who attempt to sway him provides amusing, cutting but innocent one liner you'll want to use. His independence, demanding nothing from others, was so refreshing. I particularly love the part when Keating rushes up to Roark and demands to know what he really thinks of him. "I never think of you" Replies Roark, with un-contrived honesty. A more enjoyable read, in many ways, than the broader "Atlas Shrugged" which I would recommend as follow on to this book, after a couple of months rest!
And you'll never meet a more vile man than Ellsworth Toohey, nor a more broken man than Gail Wynand. To detract from the book, saying its Nazism or social Darwinism is ridiculous, I can see no connection! There is scene of the greatest benevolence involving Roark in the book. The infamous `rape' scene, that many find objectionable, comes over as a private fantasy of Ayn Rand. It’s hardly a shocker, it seems nothing like real accounts of rape. Don't let that cloud you.
The story is rather `black and white', but I feel that's deliberate. It is a fictional story, Rand was a novelist first, then a philosopher. It may be currently a favorite with younger people, but it’s a book that gets richer as you get wiser. I think suggestions that the book is naive are a non-criticism by people who cannot consider a constructive criticism, its the "I'm, older and wiser therefore you won’t understand, but I'm right" argument. Incidentally, I'm not that young!. Rand did not write it with a specific demographic audience in mind!
My advice is go for it, but only if you're going to read it closely and thoroughly, you may as well get as much from the novel as possible
