The first paragraph of this book's preface speaks volumes. It ends with the sentence: "The monetary policy decisions made by the Fed can lift markets overnight, bring people out of unemployment, keep growth on track, and hold inflation in check." The rest of the book is an encomium to the Fed and its magic powers. The Fed's mandates are to ensure price stability and establish full employment. So why should the Fed be concerned with "lifting markets overnight"? As for bringing people out of unemployment and keeping growth on track, there is scant evidence of any sustained growth resulting from Fed policies, mostly just creating bubbles that create the illusion of growth but ultimately end in disaster, as we are now witnessing in real time. But the most astounding claim is that the Fed's policies keep inflation in check. Since 1914, the dollar has lost about 95% of its value, whereas in the 19th century, before central banking in this country, the dollar pretty much held steady. One notable exception was the 12-year period following the great gold discoveries of 1849. However, it lasted for only 12 years and was at an annualized rate of about 1.5 percent. This is less than the Fed's current inflation target of 2 percent. One thing that comes out of the book (at least on my reading) is that the Fed governors really don't know what they're doing. There is no consensus, no consistent theory that is applied on which to base policy decisions. The Fed is basically a one-trick pony that caters to the big banks (how can it not when the big banks have representation on the boards of governors at the various banks, especially the New York Fed?). If this book is any indication, there exists an utter lack of inclination on the part of the Fed to engage in any substantive debate about issues that really affect the economy, like fractional-reserve banking. The book is full of self-congratulations for a job well done but woefully little self-examination or self-doubt. I can't recommend this book to someone seeking a critical view of central banking.